Is specific exercise needed or manual tissue work, or perhaps both? Are the pain and symptoms from a single source or multiple sources? Are the radiating symptoms neural in origin (and if so, what is causing the nerve tension or compression), or are they ischemic? Is the pain organic to a tissue or a neural representation of pain similar to phantom limb pain (which I am convinced explains some of the myalgic syndromes)? These are just a few situations that are not dismissed by the excellent clinician. Worse yet are clinicians who fail to address the cause of the pain and then default to blame the patient for having a psychosocial disorder. I close with one further generalization. A clinician who provides only passive treatments to a patient has little evidence documenting that the patient will have fewer symptoms in the future. For example, the clinician may perform an injection into the back (no supporting evidence for reducing back pain; Staal et al., 2009), manipulate some joints in the spine, or stretch the patient on a machine. Passive treatments may be helpful at the beginning of a larger treatment plan for certain people. In this case, the patient is progressed quickly into an active approach. The evidence does support the importance of the patients’ being fully invested in understanding the cause of pain and practicing strategies throughout the day to avoid these pain triggers.

Follow-up of postsurgical people compared with nonsurgical people can be sobering. Nguyen and colleagues (2011) followed up a historical group of compensated back-injured workers over the 3-year period from 1999 to 2001. A total of 725 had had lumbar fusion, compared with 725 nonsurgical control back-injured workers. After 2 years, 67% of nonsurgical people had returned to work compared with 26% of those who had had surgery. Reoperations were conducted on 27% of the surgical cases, and 36% reported complications and higher long-term opioid use. Permanent disability occurred in 11% of postsurgical patients and 2% of nonsurgical patients. The notion that surgery will eliminate back pain does not have statistical support. People have to manage their postsurgical backs just as much as they would their nonsurgical backs.

In the discussion of the U-shaped relationship between activity levels and LBD in chapter 1, we saw that stress at optimal levels strengthens the system, whereas too little or too much is detrimental to health.

