persuading the liberal metropolitan will be a cinch.

Meshchersky and Witte wait for 6 May with bated

billionaires—has fallen short of its forebears’

arrives from the French capital of his recent demise.

and will do anything to avoid the gallows.

company. Witte’s memoirs are often embellished

Struve does at least come up with a name—the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP)—and writes the party manifesto. The first congress in Minsk is attended by just nine representatives of Marxist circles from different cities (even Struve himself is not there). All are arrested immediately.

Struve does at least come up with a name—the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP)—and writes the party manifesto. The first congress in Minsk is attended by just nine representatives of Marxist circles from different cities (even Struve himself is not there). All are arrested immediately. Struve’s virtual RSDLP is in fact the “grandmother” of the future Communist Party of the Soviet Union (in later Soviet textbooks Lenin is named as the founder of everything; Struve does not even get a mention).

That is the frame of mind in which the Russian Marxists gather for their first meeting, which they call the “second congress of the RSDLP,” a nod to the “first congress” six years earlier in Minsk, at which all nine participants were arrested. The Marxist congress in Brussels is attended by forty-three people. The chairman is, of course, Plekhanov. One of his deputies is the editor of Spark, real name Ulyanov, pen name Frey, but now going by his latest (and last) pseudonym, Lenin. The meeting immediately turns into a squabble, causing the Belgian authorities to politely ask the Russian revolutionaries to leave the country.

Lenin’s venom stymie any chance of compromise.

entire Russian army resembles a “bunch of ragamuffins.”

“Throw a bomb under the horses’ hooves.”

In 1889 Albert Victor, at Queen Victoria’s insistence, proposes to Alix. But soon afterwards the plan is derailed by scandal, and not just any scandal, but one that engulfs the British royal family. London police uncover a male brothel in Fitzrovia on Cleveland Street. At the time homosexuality is a criminal offence in Britain and its empire. An indirect victim is the writer Oscar Wilde, who alludes to the scandal in his 1890 novel The Picture of Dorian Gray. He will be imprisoned for “gross indecency” six years later.

The text of the tsar’s words at the meeting is printed in official newspapers the next day. It

The text of the tsar’s words at the meeting is printed in official newspapers the next day. It ends with the words: “I have faith in the honest feelings of the working people and in their unshakable devotion to Me.† Therefore, I forgive them their guilt.” The words anger many supposedly devoted workers: first the tsar opens fire on them, and then forgives them for having been shot at.

The text of the tsar’s words at the meeting is printed in official newspapers the next day. It ends with the words: “I have faith in the honest feelings of the working people and in their unshakable devotion to Me.† Therefore, I forgive them their guilt.” The words anger many supposedly devoted workers: first the tsar opens fire on them, and then forgives them for having been shot at. Another paragraph from the royal speech is edited out. It reads: “What will you do with your free time if you work no more than eight hours a day? I, the Tsar, work nine hours a day. My work is more stressful. You work only for yourselves, but I work for all the people. If you have free time, you will engage in politics. That I will not allow. Your only purpose is work.”

and promptly uses the meat to make borsch.

and promptly uses the meat to make borsch.

and resident of Kiev, describes how the advent of political freedom is celebrated on Dumskaya Square, which will be known as Maidan (Independence Square) one hundred years later and will become a venue for all subsequent Ukrainian revolutions.

Earth. But I’m not afraid of them and pay no heed.”

forty-six-year-old Milyukov) funded by a besotted

The Union of Russian People was made up of Yablochkovs, all vaguely aware of the need to resist internationalist evil with a popular-national idea.” The Union of the Russian People is both anti-Marxist and anti-liberal. It professes populist ultra-nationalism, romanticizes violence, and rejects democratic values. In January-February 1905, when preparations begin for the elections to the State Duma, Dubrovin is single-minded: he refuses to recognize the validity of the exercise and declares that the Union of the Russian People will not participate.

More than that, he tries to present him with a fait

In the last few months of his life, John prays that Leo Tolstoy will die before he does. God is unimpressed; Tolstoy outlives Kronstadt by nearly

In the last few months of his life, John prays that Leo Tolstoy will die before he does. God is unimpressed; Tolstoy outlives Kronstadt by nearly two years.

Young people have been riding a wave of politics and revolution, but now they face the prospect of having all their hopes crushed by the revival of the old order. Many newspapers have a dedicated “Suicides” section.

Stalin tries to escape, even changing into women’s clothing, but he is caught, arrested, tried, and exiled to Turukhansk, a village in western Siberia. Stalin’s attempt to flee dressed as a woman is never mentioned in later Soviet history books. In fact, it is the Bolsheviks’ enemy Alexander Kerensky who is accused of such an unmanly action.

Mikhail, expelled from Russia for his mésalliance,

As the archduke’s car approaches, Chabrinovich throws a grenade into the road. The driver sees it coming and puts his foot to the floor. The explosion occurs under the car behind, injuring some of its occupants, but the heir to the Austrian throne is unharmed. Chabrinovich takes a capsule of cyanide and jumps into the nearby Miljacka River. But the poison is ineffective, and the river is too shallow. The terrorist is caught alive.

On 31 July Saint Petersburg’s anti-German Czech community calls for the city to be renamed. Without hesitation, Nicholas II adopts the name “Petrograd.” No one cares to remember that the name “Petersburg” is in fact of Dutch origin (Peter the Great spent several months working incognito in the Netherlands),

The tipping point is the abuse of office by petty officials: since local residents have no documents, their age is determined by a quick inspection, meaning that people can be given whatever age they want by paying a bribe.

While he is showing the draft constitution to the tsar, Sazanov has no idea that he is already doomed. Grigory Rasputin believes that the foreign minister is “marked by the devil,” while Empress Alexandra says that his “cowardice before Europe will be the death of Russia.” While on vacation, Sazonov learns that the Council of Ministers has rejected the draft constitution of Poland, that he himself has been fired and that Prime Minister Stürmer is now, additionally, the foreign minister.

In July, on the crest of optimism prompted by the Brusilov Offensive, Romania enters the war on the side of the Entente. But the Romanian army proves to be a weak fighting force and is completely decimated by August.

The slogan “Raise a cross over Hagia Sophia”—an obsession among some sections of Russian society for many decades—is not considered a fantasy, but a reality.

Hence, the creation of a new soviet (council) with the same name is a symbolic gesture. Rodzianko allocates room No. 13.

the son of a rank-and-file

Provisional Committee argue until they are hoarse:

on board the imperial train. Not wishing to hinder

Ulyanov even sends a photograph to his comrade Yakub Ganetsky, who lives in Stockholm, asking him to find a Lenin-lookalike, deaf-mute Swede whose passport (indicating deaf-mute status) could be stolen. Krupskaya pokes fun at her husband: “Who are you kidding?

give passage to the revolutionaries “willingly,

Soviet textbooks will describe Lenin’s triumphant arrival at Finland Station in Petrograd itself on 16 April as something unique. In fact, it is just one of many “revolutionary homecomings”: Tsereteli, Babushka, Plekhanov, Vera Zasulich, Vera Figner, the Socialist-Revolutionary (SR) leaders Chernov and Savinkov, the anarchist Kropotkin, and the leader of the Mensheviks Martov are all greeted by enthusiastic crowds.

The frontline defeat causes shock and hysteria in Petrograd. Lenin and the Bolsheviks are blamed for being “German spies.” The papers write that they are complicit in the failure of the Kerensky Offensive and the Russian army’s retreat: “Thanks to them—Lenin, Zinoviev, Trotsky, et al.—Wilhelm II has achieved everything he dreamt of,” writes Vladimir Burtsev, Russia’s real-life Sherlock Holmes, who unmasks double agents and provocateurs. For him there is no doubt: Lenin is a traitor.

The frontline defeat causes shock and hysteria in Petrograd. Lenin and the Bolsheviks are blamed for being “German spies.” The papers write that they are complicit in the failure of the Kerensky Offensive and the Russian army’s retreat: “Thanks to them—Lenin, Zinoviev, Trotsky, et al.—Wilhelm II has achieved everything he dreamt of,” writes Vladimir Burtsev, Russia’s real-life Sherlock Holmes, who unmasks double agents and provocateurs. For him there is no doubt: Lenin is a traitor. The first to be arrested is Kamenev, followed by the commander of the Kronstadt sailors, Midshipman Raskolnikov. Lenin and Zinoviev go into hiding, which the press reports as proof of their guilt.

Interestingly, in September and October 1917 the Bolsheviks accuse the Provisional Government of everything that they themselves will do just a few months later, including disrupting the Constituent Assembly, restoring the death penalty, and moving the capital from Petrograd to Moscow.

The Bolsheviks’ second promise is to provide land for the peasants. However, they do the opposite: on 27 October the Congress of Soviets adopts the Decree on Land, abolishing the right of private land ownership entirely. At that time, a fifth of all land in Russia belongs to the peasants, but now the state takes it away from them and implements a redistribution and utilization program. But that is not all: less than six months later, in the spring of 1918, a “food dictatorship” decree is issued under which “committees of the poor” confiscate “surpluses” from the peasants, which amounts in practice to almost everything they produce.

The third and most important promise—to hand over the factories to the workers—is also unfulfilled. All enterprises are nationalized. The workers’ dream of controlling the factories and receiving some of the profits is shattered.

The Russian Civil War lasts almost six years and ends in victory for the Bolsheviks. It claims the lives of more than 10 million people—five times more than the number of Russian casualties in the First World War, which the Bolsheviks promised to end.

Struve, too, opines that Nicholas II was too soft—all the revolutionaries, including himself, should have been physically eliminated, says the former Marxist and liberal.

developed civilization into the depths of Hades.

