So in quick summary, the things that women are hard-wired to find sexually attractive in men are physical health, physical power, social power and interpersonal dominance.

The point is that all these skills that women say they want really are valuable and do create comfort for the woman, but they don’t generally create sexual attraction to the man who has them.

The best Alpha display is that you're just going to make your way in the world with confidence and succeed at whatever it is that you're going to do. Opinions of the rest of the world be damned, you're your own man. And like a huge truck on the interstate, you just create a huge hole in the air that makes following you easy. Alpha isn’t about being a bastard who makes people obey him. Alpha is about making people want to follow you and pulling the attraction of women.

Most wives don’t want their husbands visiting strip clubs. But most wives would probably experience him visiting a strip club with much less concern than if he came home with a gift for her of “this great eyeliner that I found on sale at the mall.” That would tend to signal potential gayness or cross dressing rather than heterosexuality. A husband who turns into her best girlfriend loses her sexual attraction as a consequence.

It’s not terribly politically correct to frame a male-led household as better than a female-led one and there are obvious concerns about how this can be abused by the husband. However, these are essentially no different than the same concerns of a relationship where a female is dominant over the male. I’m sure the reader knows of several men living in a state of constant fear for displeasing their wives and the resultant tongue-lashing that would follow. Not to mention how studies show that women are no less prone to resort to violence than men are in relationships. Leadership and husbandly dominance ideally works on the principle of evoking the desire to follow. If a wife submits, it’s through her own consent and right to do so. For the majority of wives, a husband acting with leadership creates and sustains her sexual attraction to him, which is of ultimate benefit to both of them in the relationship. Likewise, the ability to exercise reasonable discipline and direction over the children in the family frames a husband as the social leader and makes him more attractive to his wife. A husband’s failure to be effective with the children will reduce the wife’s attraction to him.

This physical connection is also good for babies and children. There is the well-known effect of “failure to thrive” in babies that are supplied with adequate food and shelter, but are left untouched. Without physical touch, the babies suffer slower growth, greater illness and can even die.

Medical issues aside, when you are cut off from sex by your spouse, the marriage is in critical condition because one spouse has started actively working against the marriage. This is a serious and legitimate issue. You have the right to feel angry and hurt by it. It’s okay to take action to address this issue.

The solution is to take action that makes it clear that the problem is in fact intolerable. While you don't know whether you will make a move towards option two (extramarital sex), or option three (divorce), option one just isn't acceptable anymore. You need to stop pursuing the dead end of sex with your wife and start preparing yourself to pursue things with other women in general. So you work out, upgrade the clothes a little, open up a dating profile, just go out a little without providing the details, smile, be happy, friendly, carefree, text some new friends, socialize... play.

The goal is to stop chasing and pursuing your wife and generally make it clear by your actions that you are no longer going to be held as her emotional hostage. Show that you will be capable of moving towards a life without her and that you have discovered the will to do so. Once you have that attitude down, there is a reasonable chance that her level of interest in you will significantly change for the better. Don’t actually cheat on her; just make it clear you have the potential to move on without her.

The Betaization Trap is that by trying to do everything possible to make her happy and being endlessly nice to her, you undo what created her initial attraction to you, so she falls out of love and loses sexual interest. Most men never understand this until it is too late

Don’t become angry, frustrated, insulting, bad tempered, grumpy, sullen or otherwise freeze her out. All that drama will just underline that she has power over you to affect you by denying you sex. By having an emotional reaction about not getting sex, you are making it clear to her that she has enormous leverage over you by giving or not giving you sex.

Over the long term though, constant denial does very much become a hot issue and outside the bedroom, it should be something that is mentioned only occasionally. Again, work hard to not frame it in anger or that she is trying to do something wrong; frustration and disappointment is a better angle. Long term though, (as in over months and years) you gain the most leverage by self-improvement rather than complaint.
