Where market societies have emerged, Polanyi observes, it has not been as a result of chance or evolution but through the artifice of recurrent and systematic political intervention.

Encumbered markets are the norm in every society, whereas free markets are a product of artifice, design and political coercion. Laissez-faire must be centrally planned; regulated markets just happen. The free market is not, as New Right thinkers have imagined or claimed, a gift of social evolution. It is an end-product of social engineering and unyielding political will.

In those British cities in which Thatcherite policies of labour market deregulation were most successful in lowering rates of unemployment, rates of divorce and family breakdown were correspondingly highest.

The intermediary social institutions on which the free market depended in mid-Victorian England became hindrances to its reconstruction in the late twentieth century. Professional associations, local authorities, mutual societies and stable families were impediments to the mobility and individualism that are required by unfettered markets. They limit the power of markets over people.

Few visions of the future have ever been so delusive as Herbert Marcuse’s or Michel Foucault’s perennially fashionable vision of perfected capitalist control of society. Late modern capitalism may incarcerate people in high-tech prisons and monitor them by video surveillance cameras at their work-place and in the high street; but it does not box them into an iron cage of bureaucracy or imprison them forever within a minute niche in the division of labour. It abandons them to a life of fragments and a proliferation of senseless choices. The dystopia we face is not a nightmare of totalitarian control. Intermingling the ephemera of fashion with an ingrained reflex of nihilism, American Psycho is a truer approximation to the late modern condition than Kafka’s The Castle. Free markets are the most potent solvents of tradition at work in the world today. They set a premium on novelty and a discount on the past. They make of the future an infinite rerun of the present. The society they engender is antinomian and proletarian.

Behind all these ‘meanings’ of globalization is a single underlying idea, which can be called de-localization: the uprooting of activities and relationships from local origins and cultures.

The result is a re-proletarianization of much of the industrial working class and the de-bourgeoisification of what remains of the former middle classes. The free market seems set to achieve what socialism was never able to accomplish – a euthanasia of bourgeois life. The imperatives of flexibility and mobility imposed by deregulated labour markets put particular strain on traditional modes of family life. How can families meet for meals when both parents work on shifts? What becomes of families when the job market pulls parents apart?

Like the Utopia envisaged by Lenin, the global free market aims to bring into being a state of affairs that has never hitherto existed in human society – and which goes far beyond the mid-Victorian English free market and the liberal international economic order that existed until 1914. In a global free market the movements of goods, services and capital are unfettered by political controls imposed by any sovereign state, and markets have been detached from their original societies and cultures. This is a Utopia divorced from history, hostile to vital human needs, and finally as self-destroying as any that has been attempted in our century.

Global laissez-faire and the communist project that animated the former Soviet Union have many of the same enemies. They are hostile to national and cultural differences in economic life and to the inheritances of tradition and history. They resent the backwardness of peasants and village life. They are intolerant of the unruly individualism of the bourgeoisie and the refractoriness of working people. The chief victims of the global free market, as of War Communism and the Soviet system, are peasants and – to a lesser but still notable extent – urban industrial workers and the professional middle classes.

The environmental pollution that Feshbach and Friendly document was a legacy of the Bolshevik attitude to nature.48 In this, as in most other respects, the Bolsheviks were faithful followers of Marx. They regarded nature as at best a resource to be exploited for human purposes, at worst a foe to be conquered.

The connective tissues of social life have renewed themselves in Russia to a surprising degree. The extended family, which has all but ceased to exist in the Anglo-Saxon capitalist world, has survived Soviet communism in Russia.85 Its survival partly accounts for the ability of Russians to cope with the hardships of market reform. As Layard and Parker observe: ‘Two institutions have been crucial to survival: the extended family and the private plot of land. The extended family … is a strong element in the system of social security. Adult children almost always help their parents in old age, and people also help their siblings if they are in trouble.’86 It is the comparative weakness of ‘individualism’ in Russia that has allowed mutual aid in the extended family to persist to a degree unknown in many western, and particularly Anglo-Saxon, societies.

The Great Leap Forward was not just an attempt to industrialize Chinese agriculture and collectivize industry on a Soviet model. It was also a systematic attack on traditional Chinese practices and beliefs. Peasant traditional beliefs had been under siege since the communist victory in 1949, but it was in the Great Leap Forward, and then the Cultural Revolution, that they were finally almost destroyed: ‘Everything connected with traditional beliefs was smashed up in the Great Leap Forward.’

Will the resources of critical rationality which we have inherited from the Enlightenment enable us to cope with the disorders that its most recent project has created or compounded? Or is the global anarchy in which we find ourselves an historical fate against which we are bound to struggle, but which we are powerless to overcome? It will surely be one of history’s darkest ironies if the Enlightenment project of a world civilization ends in a chaos of sovereign states and stateless peoples struggling for the necessities of survival. The spread of new technologies throughout the world is not working to advance human freedom. Instead it has resulted in the emancipation of market forces from social and political control. By allowing that freedom to world markets we ensure that the age of globalization will be remembered as another turn in the history of servitude.

Of course it was the idea that global economic collapse could no longer happen that was truly apocalyptic. History does not stop. It continues, as evolving technologies interact with the unalterable human animal and old conflicts are given new twists. Governments may be better informed than they have ever been, but they are not any wiser and if politicians and their advisers believed the boom could go on for ever it was because they had lost any sense of history. Capitalism may be the most productive economic system that has so far developed but it has always been highly volatile. The idea that once released from government regulation the market would be self-stabilizing can only be explained in the context of the absurdly unrealistic world-view that prevailed in the twenty years after the collapse of communism.

Beginning after the Second World War, the change in economics did not immediately have much practical effect. Post-war economists may have expected too much from macroeconomic modelling; but so long as they were disciples of Keynes they understood that no calculus of probability could map the future. Only when the fundamentalist dogmas of free-market ideology melded with positivist methodology in the Chicago School was this insight lost. The result was faith-based economics, masquerading as science.

while peak oil may have already arrived. Depleting the earth of its remaining reserves of cheap conventional oil, then moving on to coal, will speed up global warming; but because of the lack of any overall alternative it is probably inevitable. Renewable energy cannot support a world of nine billion humans – the consensus estimate of the global population forty years from now. There is no Green energy mix that can sustain industrialization in a world of high and rising human numbers. The result can only be intensified conflict. Humans have already exceeded the carrying capacity of the planet, and as climate change advances the overshoot will become more extreme. Against this background of human overpopulation, resource wars are sure to be fought to secure control not only of the planet’s oil, but also fresh water and arable land. Faster climate change will itself foment conflict by triggering population movements and a scramble for oil and minerals as global warming uncovers the polar caps.

In these circumstances the task for humankind is not to promote sustainable development. It is to work out how to make a sustainable retreat,7 and here technology will be crucial. There are many ills that technology cannot cure – it cannot reverse the destruction of biosphere or make humans more reasonable, for example. There is no technical fix for the planet, or for the human condition. Even so, hightech solutions – including technologies that most Greens most oppose, such as nuclear power, genetically modified food and cleaner coal – will be indispensable in negotiating the environmental chaos that is now unavoidable. The goal must be to reduce not the carbon footprint but the human impact on the planet, the ultimate cause of the climate shift that is under way today. This cannot be done by reverting to modes of life that seem more natural. At best, the result of Green policies of this kind would be a crowded and conquered Earth in which every available spot was turned over to organic farms and wind turbines. Happily this is a nightmare that has no chance of becoming reality.

The meltdown of financial markets has done more than wipe out wealth on an unprecedented scale. It has also destroyed the neo-liberal belief in progress through ever expanding production and consumption, and an anxious search is under way for a replacement creed. Religious fundamentalism is one result of this quest, Green utopianism another. Intelligent improvisation – using technical fixes to reduce the human impact on the Earth, for example – is more likely to yield results than the search for solutions. But realistic thinking goes against the grain. It is easier to inhabit an imaginary future than deal with the intractable present. The boom years were based on the belief that if we all ran faster the past could be left behind. Instead we had the crash, history moved on and it is the future that has been consumed.

False Dawn’s reception confirmed one of its central theses: contemporary opinion – in politics, the media and business – has become so detached from enduring human realities that it can no longer distinguish utopia from reality. As a result, it is unprepared for the return of history – with its familiar intractable conflicts, tragic choices and ruined illusions – which we are currently witnessing.

Conventional opinion perceives the collapse of communism as a victory for ‘the West’. In fact, Marxian socialism was a prototypically western ideology. Over the long haul of history, the disintegration of Marxian socialism in Russia and China represents a defeat for all western models of modernization. The breakdown of central planning in the Soviet Union and its dismantlement in China marked the end of an experiment in forced-march modernization in which the model of modernity was the nineteenth century capitalist factory.

A global free market is a project that was destined to fail. In this, as in much else, it resembles that other twentieth century experiment in utopian social engineering, Marxian socalism. Each was convinced that human progress must have a single civilization as its goal. Each denied that a modern economy can come in many varieties. Each was ready to exact a large price in suffering from humanity in order to impose its single vision on the world. Each has run aground on vital human needs. If we take history as our guide, we must expect that the global free market will shortly belong to an irrecoverable past. Like other twentieth-century utopias, global laissez-faire – together with its casualties – will be swallowed into the memory hole of history.

